hello carina cavallo with the top
stories on abc news
the former melbourne school principal
malcolm lifer has lost an appeal
against a ruling to extradite her to
australia to face 74 charges of sexual
abuse
the decision from israel's supreme court
means lifer has exhausted her avenues
for appeal
israel's justice minister can now sign
the extradition order
to have her return to melbourne to face
trial
melbourne underworld figure tony
mockbell has had one of his drug
convictions overturned as a result of
the lawyer x scandal
mockbell launched an appeal after it
emerged his lawyer nicola gabo was also
working as a police informant
residents in parts of northern new south
wales are working to determine the
extent of the damage caused by extreme
rain which made the tweed river
flood nearby homes ses crews are helping
residents near byron bay and lismore to
flee to higher ground
amid a lull in the weather that is
expected to break overnight
and the prime minister scott morrison
says a potential china trade ban on
australian coal would be a lose-lose
situation for all sides
a chinese state-owned media outlet is
claiming power plants have been ordered
not to burn australian coal
beijing is yet to confirm the reports
those are the latest stories from
abc news stay with us now for the drum
[Music]
thank you
hello and welcome to the drama i'm ellen
fanning coming up
as his victory is officially confirmed
joe biden says that democracy has been
tested
but ultimately prevailed now it's time
to turn the page as you've done
throughout our history
to unite to heal the journey
of a t-shirt a new report reveals that
chinese slave labor could be the reason
our high street purchases
are so cheap and from fire to flood
australia's tourism sector suffers
another blow as
severe weather batters the country's
east coast
joining me on the panel tonight ceo of
advisory firm yetz and associates
president of the chinese australian
forum and labour party member jason
yetzenley great to see you good to be
here
uh fashion editor at the australian
glena's trail nash lovely to have you in
thanks for having me uh in the foyer
well and truly 1.5 metres away from us
when can you come back to the desk
author and writer cole brown good to see
you cole
good to be here and somewhere at home in
a broom club at the ceo of the tourism
and transport forum margie osmond g'day
maggie
hi there helen how are you very well
thank you can't wait for 2021 and
everybody back in the room
and you can join us on twitter from
whatever room you're in using the
hashtag the drummond on facebook
the wheels of the us political system
are powered by some very staid very
boring conventions the sort of behind
the scenes
pomp and ceremony that only really
tragic observers
of american politics ever get excited
about for instance
last month's voters actually cast their
ballots not for the president
directly but for electors in each state
and today these electors formally voted
for the winning candidate in their state
confirming drumroll joe biden's victory
as the 46th president
of the united states normally this
process doesn't get much attention so it
says a lot about the moment we're in
that it's headline news this ceremonial
process
all happened against the backdrop of a
president who is still refusing to
accept
the results of the election his
supporters still
disillusioned and distrustful and a
pandemic
now completely out of control
well today across the u.s members of the
electoral college will cast
their votes in the presidential election
it's normally an unremarkable
and fairly ordinary day that's just a
formality but not this year with donald
trump's continued refusal to accept the
outcome of the election
the process is being monitored closely
across 50 states and washington d.c
overnight thousands of people took to
the streets of washington d.c
to support the president's attempts to
block joe biden's election
violence erupting between pro and
anti-trump demonstrators leading to
dozens of arrests
we're looking at millions of americans
for the first time
questioning the legitimacy of a free and
fair election
right now michigan is getting ready to
cast its electoral
votes michigan's capitol building is
shut down for today's vote because of
quote credible threats of violence in
the hotly contested state of georgia
they've already held
three recounts i am pleased to announce
that joseph r biden has received 16
votes
for president of the united states
together
the vice president-elect harris and i
earned
306 electoral votes
while exceeding the 270 electoral votes
needed to secure victory
306 electoral votes is the same number
of electoral votes
that donald trump and vice president
pence
received when they won in 2016. excuse
me
at the time president trump called his
elect the electoral college tally a
landslide
[Music]
by his own standards these numbers
represented
a clear victory then and i respectfully
suggest
they do so now the supreme court
formally rejected that
trump-backed gop lawsuit brought by the
texas attorney general
the purpose of that lawsuit was to
overturn the election results
in four key battleground states won by
president-elect biden
perhaps the most troubling and most
prominent example
of a maga meltdown the head of the
republican party in texas
calling for the red states to secede
from the united states
the electors of the commonwealth of
pennsylvania have cast 20 votes
for the honorable joseph r biden we have
six votes for joseph r biden for
president
for joseph r biden eyes 55
knows zero president-elect biden has now
received a majority of electoral votes
needed to win the presidency in america
politicians don't take power people
grant
power to them the flame of democracy was
lit in this nation a long time ago and
we now know
nothing not even a pandemic or an abuse
of power
can extinguish that flame
cole let's turn to you i've never seen
such coverage for the electoral college
process there it was on
zoom we actually watched it happen is
this the end of the argument
no i mean the argument from trump was
never based in fact right so there's no
there's no reason to believe that that a
greater preponderance of fact will
will quiet him down i think that you'll
continue to hear him
claim that this was a stolen election
you'll continue to hear him make
unsubstantiated unsubstantiated claims
of fraud
but but the fact the matter is that
we'll have absolutely no bearing on who
becomes president in january
uh biden has now secured that okay and
so what do you make
of the argument uh from republicans
certainly in texas and there was a rogue
republican
i think in michigan sort of uh saying
talking about secession talking about
maybe electors
would not vote the way that the voters
instructed them to but in fact that they
would cast a vote for donald trump now
that didn't happen but that
that is extraordinary language to use
this slight after an election yeah
so so i think that the the thing to
underscore there though is that it
didn't happen um and that those cases
are actually aberrations
you know what we saw today is is truly a
formality in the democratic process
um where all of the none of the electors
actually defected from
uh where they were pledged and committed
so in those in those aberrant cases
i think what you're seeing is not um any
real suggestion of action or policy
what you're seeing is uh republicans in
each of those states
playing by the trump playbook which is
to make outlandish claims
uh in order to grab headlines and if
nothing else raise their
their name recognition i i don't think
that there's any real threat
of a secession uh for the state of texas
uh
you know like i think if people in t i
think if you started asking texans
uh what they thought about that they
might uh agree with me on that one
at the same time maggie there has been
and you got it in biden's speech
and you certainly got it from the
republican
speaker of the michigan house who kind
of slapped down
uh this rogue republican and said if he
didn't vote
you know if he went rogue and he didn't
vote in which in the way in which the
electors hadn't instead cast a vote for
trump to try and you know usurp the
elections he said
i fear we'd lose our country forever
this would truly
bring mutually assured destruction for
every future election in regards to the
electoral college
i can't stand for that i won't so you've
got people actually standing up
as if there's a lot at stake with this
sort of rhetoric
well i think clearly um in america this
is become
the only story of the day and i think
that uh
for americans who've you know relied for
so long on the sanctity of their
democratic process
this is everybody's worst nightmare and
i think
never having happened on this scale
before they're a bit lost about which
way to go
but essentially i suppose we just have
to be very grateful here in australia
for a much simpler system and universal
suffrage
hmm at the same time cole you know
you're saying well
well the process worked but how much
is democracy about convention
about the president saying i concede
about his supporters not coming out into
the street um
and about sort of rogue state
republicans not saying
wow i could i could seed uh dissent and
distrust in the electoral system
for political advantage i
i think that that's a valid question and
before that i'm sort of too dismissive
of the concerns here i think that you
make an excellent point
um you know what we did see was was a
true attack in rhetoric
on on a free and fair electoral process
and uh
trump was just not good at that and and
the and the election was just not that
close you know
in georgia for instance uh they had two
recounts and still
uh biden was up by 12 000 votes i do
think that these
these uh continued attacks on the
process could be really dangerous
uh were this election closer and in
future elections that are much closer
um you know you're looking at a
republican party where only 26
of the republican party uh has
confidence in this result
uh that doesn't reflect the the broader
electoral uh you know populous
but in that party trump's rhetoric has
really been effective uh and and that
does
bode uh really negatively for future
elections um
should this continue disinformation be
allowed jason you do hear that that kind
of notion that
it's okay in a sense this time because
as one
foreign affairs commentator put it he's
a cartoon autocrat he's just not very
good at it
right i think there's a number of you
know problems here you know
number one i think it was a close shave
we got lucky that joe biden actually won
the vote if president trump had won the
process
would have continued and he would have
had constitutional authority and
would have been confirmed number one
number two you
mentioned convention in mature
democracies conventions work they don't
have to be written down it's black
letter law
i think the problem with america now is
that no longer holds true
where these unspoken conventions are all
of that's gone out the window
but the biggest problem i think america
has now is truth's gone out the window
there's no arbiter of fact or evidence
in american democracy
the media everybody's nodding all three
screens
the media used to play that role and i
think it's shown that it's no longer
capable of
and so i think well they did change the
law if i was smarter i'd be able to
bring it to mind but
in the last generation the the
requirement
for fact-based reporting in the united
states was thrown out the women
labelling
tweets inaccurate tweets is just not
enough and there has to be in
any functioning democracy an arbiter
effect and i hope
maybe if the media can't do that maybe
universities
institutes of higher learning can play
that role and the public has to support
them
to play that role because if there isn't
an arbiter a fact or evidence
in a democracy it's alice in wonderland
it's it's it's fantasy world it's it's a
free-for-all
glynis um i i watched i tried to watch
uh
biden's speech i got about five minutes
into the 13 minutes he's coughing
he's clearing his throat all the way
through it um
it's a long way from soaring rhetoric
you've got friends in the states are
they drawing any reassurance from this
uh i don't know about that i've had a
few friends moved back from the states
lately i've got a few who are
planning to move back in the new year i
think everyone's
there's just a lot of fear over there
and
i think the scary thing is that yeah
this this seed
of belief in lies and misinformation
has has infiltrated the whole country
and
and you've got other issues over there
like people who refuse to believe facts
and that sort of thing
also have guns and things you know
that's not a great situation
so i think the the whole there must be
so many disenfranchised people in
america who
find trump believable which in itself
is unbelievable to me uh it just kind of
goes to show you how broken that
country is just a quick one jason um
you talked about facts but trust is
broken too
the way in which uh the america first
nationalist agenda
um meant that alliances uh
nato australia the rest of it were sort
of put to one side
i mean what will it take uh for allies
to believe
that the u.s is going to be uh a
reliable power in the world
because you could take the view that
this is just a sort of four-year
interregnum the biden presidency a
four-year hiatus
and that maybe trump was the new normal
i think it will take
predictability commitment um honouring
promises
rebuilding those alliances but at the
same time
i think that there is a risk for
australia here i mean it was
pretty easy to be independent for
australia to be independent of the
united states on the trump
because it was so out there i think that
it's really important under a biden
administration that we don't just
fall into the warm comfortable glow of
renewed american leadership
in the world and that we recognize that
we still have to be independent where
our national interests don't necessarily
align with america's name
and where would that occur um
agricultural trade
wine trade where we compete legitimately
for international students in
international education
um a range of issues where our national
interests in america's natural interests
may not be necessarily directly aligned
you're nodding away there cole
i i think that makes a lot of sense i
think that uh since i've come here as
you mentioned i think i only came here
in february and
and since i've come here the the sort of
u.s centric culture at times has been
uh kind of a wonder to me i think that
that totally makes sense that this is a
good
moment for a for a reconsideration of
that uh
alignment i should also say just before
we go uh jason's point about the truth
i think that an important thing to
underscore there is that uh our
understanding of who the media are has
obviously changed drastically
uh in in the past several decades you
mentioned the legislation that applied
in the 90s
um you know who the media are where
people are getting their facts from
uh you know we're no longer talking
about the cnn and the msnbc's of the
world we're also talking about
uh breitbart and so forth so i think
that that it's it's just more difficult
to
to uh regulate a body that is so
amorphous
uh uh so not self-contained well for
months now dozens of australian ships
laden with coal
have been sitting off china's coast
unable to be offloaded
their entry has been blocked
unofficially by the chinese government
now after weeks of speculation it
appears that coal will officially be
banned
along with australian beef barley and
wine according to a report in the
state-owned
global times the australian government
is seeking clarification but says if it
is the case
china will be in breach of world trade
organization rules
i make the point that the thermal coal
is
about 4 billion out of the 13 billion in
exports to china
china is not our biggest market for
thermal coal that is in fact japan
which is more than double the exports
than we have to china
and on metcol india is actually our
biggest met coal export so our coal
mines
and our coal exports have a diverse
customer base
australia's trade minister says this
will only damage china's commitment to
clean energy
australian coal is around one and a half
times
more efficient in terms of energy
production than most other competitor
nations including chinese domestic coal
that means that to get the same level of
energy generation
china will end up having to use more
coal from
other sources and generate more
emissions
from those sources which will do
anything but
help china in terms of meet some of the
commitments
it's made to the world around emissions
reduction as well
maggie you're in the business of um
getting export dollars into australia
through tourism and transport so what do
you think of the government's
response morrison's suggestion that
finding out in this way or the
government suggestion that
finding out in this way through the
media is disrespectful and dismissive
and a sort of a
wagging the finger of saying we'll we'll
see you in court
well i don't think many australians
would disagree with the prime minister's
reading of it but i suppose the bigger
issue here is we still haven't got to
the bottom of the why
and the why this relationship with china
has soured so completely over the last
12 18 months
and to the earlier conversation about um
you know are we following as slavishly
in the past as we have the american
precedent a lot of things
one can only think that this kind of
exercise with the chinese is in fact
going to drive
australia closer to allies like the us
who don't buy alcohol is that your dog
by the way
yes i'm sorry about you
all right i wonder who's a media hound i
see
telling what else can i do i was very
distracted but sorry
have you got a sense of why and and and
is there any point in saying this will
drive us into the into
you know into the welcoming arms of i
don't know anybody else who
i mean unless they want to buy alcohol
how welcoming can their arms possibly be
i i think the main reason why it's
deteriorated is
because we've been unnecessarily
provocative of china and there's some
areas we have to be provocative
we are standing for our values and we
are pushing back where we need to push
back
but there are some things that we did
that were just you know unnecessary i
mean
there's a couple of really big ironies
here the first irony is
we refuse to lead globally on action on
climate where we have all these natural
advantages but for some reason
we thought it was a good idea to lead
globally on being tough on china
on the origins of the coronavirus where
we're so vulnerable
the other big irony in with the coal
thing is that i think
the prime minister spent so much trying
to
defend and protect coal jobs in the last
election
but now we're in this situation where so
many coal mining jobs
are at risk now maybe you know over time
those jobs will decline because of the
changing energy mix but we actually need
time to transition those industries we
don't want
sudden death like the situation we're in
at the moment
how serious the situation is it do you
think in terms of the potential impact
on our gdp
i think it is really serious it's a real
worry um
our exports to china the in the june
quarter there are almost
50 of our total exports eight and a half
percent of our gdp
one in 13 australian jobs have something
to do
with our trade with china now if that
goes out the window
this is tremendously um serious for the
uh australian economy so we
we really need to find a way to fix this
any thoughts the only thing i could
think of
which is politically impossible is that
now that unfortunately our own
uh vaccine has hit a war if we were to
buy a few million doses of the chinese
vaccine i reckon that'd fix it
but it'll never happen and
interestingly i think if we look at why
that would never happen then we get to
the heart
of the reason why the australia-china
relationship is in such a bad state
and ultimately it's about trust because
we wouldn't
trust that vaccine to be effective we
wouldn't trust the vaccine to be
effective we wouldn't trust the um the
chinese communist party to do the right
thing by
you know in its supply arrangements and
just the level of animosity towards the
regime and towards china
um within the political system right now
i i unfortunately think it's
um it's politically impossible
for that to happen cole as you say
you've been in the country since
february it's it must be fascinating to
have both a u.s perspective on this and
an australian experience of
deteriorating relations
yes you know obviously us has been
engaged in its own trade war with china
that has been largely unsuccessful
uh the you know the trump efforts uh the
phase one deal that we struck
was has not really been abided to by
china uh and
actually right now again ironically uh
you're looking at chinese exports
skyrocketing into the u.s um as demand
for many of those goods has gone up
in a corona virus environment where uh
demand for services has collapsed
um i i do have one point that is almost
more of a question because i am by no
means an expert on australia chinese
chinese relations
but one trump card that it does seem
australia still has is is iron ore
exports
um where australia supplies you know 65
of chinese iron
um that seems like an area where where
uh australia can really be in a position
of power does that seem like a
a card that that australia would be
willing to play at this point
maggie do you have views on directing
that questionnaire yeah
i directed that question that jason who
just spoke okay all right we'll go to
jason and then to maggie um i mean
because we saw matt canavan who's
uh lnp uh mp today saying let's put a
levy on iron ore to china and he was
kind of immediately slapped down and
ignored
i i wouldn't think it's an advisable
thing to do because what it does
is that again it's another further
escalation
um of the dispute and i think what is
really needed now is an off-ramp
um and a de-escalation but we've been
talking about this for weeks the prime
minister gave a virtual speech in london
in which he said let's calm this down
and the rhetoric's only ratcheted up in
the days and weeks since
um i think that we need to as
people say this is the japanese approach
i think we need to talk more
i talk less and do more rather than talk
more and do less here
maggie what ought we be prepared to do i
mean the list of 14 demands
uh from the embassy the beijing embassy
here was ridiculous you know obviously
australian
government is not going to try and
control the media and academics and
think tanks and say do not
do not speak harshly of communist china
that's not going to happen
but what should we be prepared to do to
fix this
well look i think part of the issue is
that
in terms of the fix and i think jason is
absolutely right this is all about the
longer term relationship
and clearly the relationship has failed
and the chinese have very very
justifiably long memories
um and you know all the rhetoric that's
circulating at the moment the constant
questioning
and the you know sort of mini snipe back
attacks none of that is actually going
to help when there is no real dialogue
going on so in the absence of real
dialogue
we're going to get lists of demands like
we're seeing i mean i think from
for example the tourism industry's
perspective you know our biggest source
of tourists is in fact china
and while that's not necessarily an
issue right now with all of our
international borders closed
once they do reopen that's going to be a
critical part of
our capacity to recover the industry so
from our industry's perspective in
particular we need to see that friendly
dialogue
open again and as quickly as possible
and
if that has to happen through
potentially a third party is there
another avenue for this conversation to
occur if we're not connecting directly
in china australia look at risk of
having your dog drive everybody mad at
you i'm sorry
it is a lovely metaphor for what's going
on between canberra and
dogs there are all these barking dogs do
you ring your hands
quietly and say would everybody in
canberra just shut up
uh i think it would be helpful it is
that season of the year where i think
there's an awful lot of people wanting
to buy
in on just about any discussion that's
circulating and get a little headline
before we have the christmas close down
it would be much simpler at this point
in time if everybody stepped back and
understood how complex
and how vital our relationship is with
china
and let some of the experts get in and
restart the dialogue without
interruption or diversion
from canine or human um yes
i'd suggest you put the dog in another
room but that seems cruel
doesn't it yes it's it's imminent
[Laughter]
while maggie puts the dog in another one
how anxious do you think i mean
are australians kind of cheering on yes
we will not be told to shut up
you sort of beating our chests saying no
no we're not going to put up with this
attempt to control the nature of our
country from an authoritarian trading
partner
or are they kind of going gosh that's a
lot of our trade
well it is a lot of our trade isn't it
um and i
but i don't think we like being told
what to do either so
it's a bit of a bind i mean look maybe
we should try some you know soft fashion
diplomacy at this point because the
chinese love our fashion apparently
a lot of designers would would tell you
that um
yeah it's really tricky i mean i'm no
expert in this field but
i mean for me the thing i guess i look
at this and i go
yeah why are we still so reliant on
these
coal exports and the like i would love
to see this is a bit of a
kick up the back side for us to really
embrace renewables in this country i
mean it
just ma no that'll help the export
dollar but um
there are other things surely that we
can be focusing on
it's a very simplistic approach i know
but i actually don't think the chinese
expect us to trade away our values
they have a deep understanding of
national interests and core national
interests so where we act
in in line with our national interest i
think the chinese totally get that
i think what they're pissed about is
where we go beyond that
and we unnecessarily sort of provoke
them or we make ourselves out to be
throwing punches
on behalf of another great sort of
superpower
um and i think if we just held back and
we're just
a smarter about the way we went about
that
and then tried to find and double down
on some areas where there's
potential for mutually beneficial
cooperation
and made some gestures there i think
hopefully we see the relationship slowly
beginning to improve
and isn't that interesting because
that's what the prime minister's saying
today look we don't want to mix politics
and trade
and you're saying take your own advice
you are watching the dram with me on the
panel ceo of advisory firm jets and
associates jason yetzen lee fashion
editor at the australian glina's trial
nash author and writer cole brown
and ceo of the tourism and transport
forum maggie osmond and her dog
belle
for years we've known that china's
weaker muslims are being systematically
discriminated against by their
government
we've heard tales of mass lock-ups
re-education camps and religious
persecution
over the last year the work of aid
groups and journalists has presented a
clearer picture
of what's actually taking place but at
some point the treatment of china's
muslim minority has gone from the
unthinkable
to irrefutable today a report from the
bbc has revealed that china
is forcing hundreds of thousands of
uyghurs and other minorities into hard
manual labor in the vast cotton fields
of its western
region of xinjiang twenty percent of the
world's cotton
comes from this region the plight of
china's wiggers is now
quite literally threaded through the
clothes on our backs
the drums ruby cornish has more
today the bbc revealed new evidence that
large amounts of cotton from
china's xinjiang region which make up a
fifth of the world's supply
is being picked by uyghurs and other
religious minorities
[Music]
newly unearthed documents policy papers
and state news reports
describe 150 000 uyghurs being sent to
one part of the region
and a similar number being organized for
another
bbc reporter john sudworth spoke to a
man whose family
is among those workers my mom told me
like she's
picking the carton for the government
officers
as well as that notorious re-education
facilities like this one
are doubling as forced labor camps
something else has been built next door
a textile factory days after its
completion
a large group of people could be seen
being moved between
the camp and the factory journalists
filming the building from the street
were hassled and told to leave
we are entitled to film in public the
chinese government denies it is running
any forced labor scheme
it says the factories are a poverty
alleviation initiative
the so-called forced labor is just
fabricated
rumors made up by certain institutions
and
individuals in the u.s and the western
world
truly free trade cannot involve slave
labor
in the united states a bill with
bipartisan support may be about to
compel
companies to act the uyghur forced
labour prevention act bans the import of
goods from xinjiang that are the product
of forced labor
the onus will be on the companies to
prove their products
are not this would basically shift the
burden of proof to companies
to try and prove that they're not made
with forced labor so they can get those
goods in
in march the australian strategic policy
institute
published a report listing 82 brands
with supply chains
leading back to questionable work
practices in xinjiang
including apple nike adidas and calvin
klein
the new york times reports that apple
nike and coca-cola
have been lobbying the u.s government to
water down the bill
arguing that its requirements are too
ambitious i think that's the most
significant provision you'll see put
into this bill before it passes
is that there'll be a delay in the
enactment of it
so the companies can get more time the
bill passed the house in september and
look set to do the same
in the senate i think this bill will
pass but it won't be this year uh
congress they basically ran out of time
to pass it this year
it will be reintroduced immediately in
january
and i wouldn't be surprised if it passes
in the first quarter of next year
[Music]
cole let's start with you it's um
it's kind of fascinating and chilling at
the same time that this um
iconic quintessential u.s garment the
t-shirt
is being made with cotton hand-picked by
slaves
and that that's resonating in the u.s
congress that seems appropriate yeah
yeah and and uh i think it's about time
frankly i mean the the uyghur
concentration camps are something that
we've known about since 2017
2018 uh and known broadly about uh the
trump administration has vacillated
widely on on its criticism of those
camps
shooting down i believe in 2017 uh the
treasury's proposed plan to
to sanction china for that those actions
and then as recently as june
uh sort of shifting positions a bit and
enacting the weaker human rights act
so i think that it's nice to see
bipartisan support uh coming down
forcefully on companies that that are
engaging in profiting from
uh forced labor i think it's about time
and how do you read that is that just
another maneuver a strategic piece of
legislation
or or is that kind of a moral stance
because we see the um
we see officials coming out saying that
on december 2
they've banned cotton from the company
named in the bbc report which is the
xinjiang production and
construction corps and the deputy
secretary of the dhs
says made in china is not just a country
of origin
it's a warning label be careful the
gifts you buy
yeah i actually don't think that at this
point uh it can be just a political
maneuver i think that this is just too
big of a story frankly
i think that when you you see uh
particularly in the the latter half of
the trump administration
um publicly there there were some uh
comments
you know criticizing china for the
uyghur treatment uh but privately it was
it was broadly reported particularly in
john bolton's memoir
uh that he was supportive of g and
didn't want this to become a sticking
point when trying to
uh do trade negotiations that's right i
think that you're seeing from
i think you're seeing from the biden
incoming biden administration
really harsh criticism i mean going so
far as one spokesperson calling
this a genocide uh so you're seeing
really harsh criticism that
i expect them to back up at this point
um glennis this is very much your
wheelhouse because of course the demand
for
cheaper and cheaper and cheaper fashion
in the high street in sydney and in
perth and in brisbane and hobart and
wherever
people are watching is what is driving
uh these sorts of forced labor
conditions not just in china
but in bangladesh in all sorts of places
even in the uk i mean this is the
astonishing thing what i thought was
interesting in that clip we just watched
was they
the companies saying that this
legislation was too ambitious
and i think is it too ambitious to ask
that there is no slavery
in your supply chain for a starter
i mean there's a case in the uk at the
moment a major sort of online high
street retailer
um is under investigation for modern
slavery out of
the factories out of leicester they've
been paid people have been paid three
pounds 50 an hour
for manufacturing very fast fashion
there and
in the uk in the uk yeah yeah and the
minimum wage is eight pounds fifty an
hour for that eight
young 20 somethings so it's not
it's not isolated this is happening
everywhere
um and it is up look i think legislation
would be great
and if australia would start to do
something similar i would
welcome that because i think it's the
only way you're gonna
really affect change because one of the
main things here is that consumers can
drive change and consumers really
have to start owning this a bit i
understand
the appeal of a five dollar t-shirt to
people who can't afford
much more than that however everyone
needs to ask
that old question if your t-shirt costs
as much as a cup of coffee
who was exploited in that supply chain
because somebody was
margie it's interesting the uk has
passed legislation as well i mean there
they are
in a perilous position with their brexit
affected trade
and they've passed legislation to kind
of put a genocide hurdle in front of any
new trade deals to essentially say a
court can rule
that a country or a region engages in
genocide or forced labor
in order to produce goods and therefore
you can't do a deal
you can't as an independent britain do a
deal a trade deal with that country
well this is all about the changing
world we live in in terms of social
license to operate
um as we were just talking about
consumers have power now
and whether you're major corporates or
whether you're government you ignore
that at your peril
uh and i think but they don't do that
they don't do that i mean
they're doing record trade all of these
shops
where you can go in that send you an
email every week saying come on we've
got a new lot we've got a new lot of
fashion come in and buy buy buy
for every documentary on netflix or the
abc talking about this
they'll sell 100 t-shirts were they
margie well but
essentially we were talking about the
government in the uk actually moving
this legislation and what i'm saying to
you there is that they're reflecting
what they're hearing from their wider
community now those companies that are
choosing not
to heed this and not to do this do it at
their own peril
because i think progressively we are
going to see the social license to
operate requirements being the ones that
people pay the most
attention to in the same sense of sort
of ethical investments and
the larger sustainability discussions
even in things like the aviation
industry now you know the critical
issues are all about biofuels
and doing and being seen to do the right
thing i'm not saying it's fixed right
now and i'm sure there are a whole range
of corporates that aren't acknowledging
their responsibilities
in this space as well or uh even as
they should but consumers are going to
drive that change and governments will
listen to that um
jason it's interesting isn't it it's
just i think
two years where the where the public
consciousness has really shifted
our understanding as we said in the
introduction has become irrefutable that
that's what's going on here
i read on thursday the france and
barcelona forward antoine
griezmann cut his commercial ties to
huawei
okay this is a soccer player right the
soccer player comes out and says
there are strong suspicions that uh
huawei tested a facial recognition
system developed by
ai firm to identify uiga and trigger and
alert to their presence
so that's the level of consciousness
that you're getting from this kind of
reporting from the bbc and the new york
times using that satellite imagery where
you can see
people being moved around in ways that
are really
troubling um absolutely
and i think this speaks to um the nature
of global commerce
right now and consumer power i mean i
think of you know my daughter
and my children they are very alive
to these issues and brands that
associate themselves with practices such
as these
really aren't on their christmas lists
but i think
almost paradoxically this is an argument
for our continued engagement with china
because it is because so many of our
garments or the cotton that
is made there we can at least apply some
pressure
now if there was as some people argue a
complete decoupling
of the west with chinese supply chains
we'd have
absolutely no leverage and no influence
over these sorts of practices and so i
still come down